POL 462: Constiutional Law II
Case Response: Masterpiece Cakeshop, Ltd. v. Colorado Civil Rights Commission
Dhairya Doshi
Page 1 of 3
Facts
Petitioner Jack Phillips owns Masterpiece Cakeshop Ltd., a bakery in Colorado, which provides
both pre-made and custom cakes. Respondents Daniel Mullins and Charlie Craig, a gay couple,
visited the store for a custom cake for their upcoming wedding. Phillips on being informed on
the occasion denied their request. Mullins and Craig reported this denial of service to the
Colorado Civil Rights Commission (CCRC), the other respondents in the case and the
Commission concluded that Phillips’ denial violated the Colorado Anti-Discrimination Act
(CADA). The Colorado Court of Appeals unanimously affirmed the Commissions’ decision and
the Colorado Supreme Court denied the petitioner’s request for certiorari. The petitioners
requested certiorari, and this Court granted review.
Legal Question(s)
• Does the Free Speech Clause of First Amendment grant an exception for public
accommodations from the Colorado Anti-Discrimination Act?
• Does the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment Grant an exception for public
accommodations from the Colorado Anti-Discrimination Act? 
Page 2 of 3
Response
The Free Speech Clause of the First Amendment states that a citizen’s freedom of speech
shall not be abridged. This Court through its jurisprudence has also held that a citizen’s speech
cannot be compelled (see J. Jackson’s opinion in West Virginia State Board of Education v.
Barnette 319 US 624 (1943)). In the area of the Fourteenth Amendment, the relevant case here is
Obergefell v. Hodges 576 US _ (2015), wherein the Court stated that same-sex couples were
guaranteed the same rights as opposite-sex couples by the Due Process Clause of the Fourteenth
Amendment.
In cases which implicate the compelled speech doctrine or the Free Speech Clause
relating to organizations, we can judge the validity of the challenge based on the following
questions. First, we consider whether the organization is a public accommodation, as defined
within Title III of the Americans with Disabilities Act (1990) and in our ruling in Roberts v.
United States Jaycees 468 US 609 (1984). If the organization is not a public accommodation,
then it has the right to choose whom it serves. In this case, Masterpiece Cakeshop is clearly a
public accommodation. Second, we look at whether the product requested by the customer in
question is made available to other customers. Public accommodations that make available
products to one set of customers cannot deny the same to another. The only exception to this is if
the product is substantially unique to the customer, as is the case here with custom-made cakes.
If it is so, then we consider whether the product or service includes a customer-requested
message. The message, which can be symbolic, textual or design-based, must be clear,
expressive, and visibly perceptive to an average person who views the product in isolation. If a
substantially unique product does not have an explicit message, then it is treated the same as a
“pre-made” one when dealing with a Free Speech challenge; we use the second question in that 
Page 3 of 3
situation. After learning of the message, the public accommodation can refuse to provide the
product with that message on Free Speech grounds as well as if the message contains hateful,
violent, or obscene language. The facts of the case show that there was no discussion between
the parties about the design or message on the cake. Since Phillips was unaware of the requested
message, his only presumable grounds for rejecting service was the identity of the customers,
which is precisely what anti-discrimination laws aim to proscribe. We conclude that the
petitioner does not satisfy the outlined criteria for an exception and is in violation of CADA.
As for the Free Exercise Clause challenge, the ruling that holds precedent is Church of
Lukumi Babalu Aye v. City of Hialeah 508 US 520 (1993). In Lukumi this Court held that any
law, challenged on Free Exercise grounds, should meet one of two criteria to be upheld. First,
utilizing the Smith test, we consider if the law is neutral in its intent and has general applicability.
If it does not, then we ask whether it furthers a compelling state interest under the strict scrutiny
test. In this case, CADA is broadly written to prohibit several forms of discrimination and does
not aim to burden the religious exercise of any group. It also furthers the state’s interest of
ensuring equal rights for all its citizens. We conclude that there are no grounds to grant an
exception to CADA based on the Free Exercise Clause of the First Amendment.